# Chapter 6 WIFI: 802.11 wireless LAN

## IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN

| Standard | Speed(up to) | range (GHz) |
| -------- | ------------ | ----------- |
| 802.11b  | 11 Mbps      | 2.4 - 5     |
| 802.11a  | 54 Mbps      | 5 - 6       |
| 802.11g  | 54 Mpbs      | 2.4 - 5     |
| 802.11n  | 200 Mbps     | 2.4 - 5     |

802.11b 12 chanels but avoid chanel compiting

802.11g use 5 chanels: so only chanel 1, 6 or 11

the set of channels 1, 6, and 11 is the only set of three non-overlapping channels.

This means that an administrator could create a wireless LAN with an aggregate maximum transmission rate of 33 Mbps by installing three 802.11b APs at the same physical location, assigning channels 1, 6, and 11 to the APs, and interconnecting each of the APs with a switch

the center frequency is different for different WAP, even though they have overlapse

> SSID: Service Set Identifiers

## 802.11 architecture: BSS (basic service set)

A BSS contains one or more wireless stations and a central **base station**, known as **access point** AP

### Service Service Set ID (SSID)

When a network administrator installs an AP, the administrator assigns a one-or two-word Service Set Identifier (SSID) to the access point.

The administrator must also assign a chan-nel number to the AP. To understand channel numbers

## 802.11 MAC protocol CSMA/CA

> to prevent collision

**RTS**: request to send

**CTS**: clear to send

device send RTS to AP

AP respond CTS back

device send data to AP

AP response ACK

## Mobility within same subnet

move within one BSS:

- As H1 wanders away from AP1, H1 detects a weakening signal from AP1 and starts to scan for a stronger signal.
- H1 receives beacon frames from AP2 (which in many corpo-rate and university settings will have the same SSID as AP1).
- H1 then disassociates with AP1 and associates with AP2, while keeping its IP address and maintaining its ongoing TCP sessions.

move between different BSS:

If H1 is initially in BSS1, then a datagram destined to H1 will be directed to H1 via AP1.

Once H1 associates with BSS2, how-ever, its frames should be directed to AP2.

One solution (a bit of a hack, really) is for AP2 to send a broadcast Ethernet frame with H1’s source address to the switch just after the new association.

When the switch receives the frame, it updates its forwarding table, allowing H1 to be reached via AP2
